# Introduction: Why Networks?

## Carl Knappett

### 1.1 NETWORKS: METAPHORS AND METHODS

'Network' is not a new term in our discipline. Archaeologists have for some time written of exchange networks, interaction networks, and road networks. Such usage is fairly generic, however; the kind of usage we make of 'network' in everyday speech. It is little more than a handy metaphor for connectivity. So why now should we see a volume on networks? The reason is that a quite different understanding of 'network' is emerging, one that goes a step further to ask what a network actually is. In its basic definition, it is nothing more than a collection of nodes and links. But this simple step, of acknowledging the network as having some basic formal properties, then opens doors. Once considered as a set of nodes and links, the next step is to define what those nodes and links actually are. Are the nodes the households in a village, and the links between them ties of marriage? Or are they a set of sites in a particular region, and their links the shared use of a particular resource; say, obsidian?

This step—to ask in more formal terms what a network is—is exactly the one taken by all the authors in this volume. Each uses some form of network analysis in tackling their own particular dataset to address questions concerning patterns and processes of interaction in past societies. As can be seen from the assembled chapters, there is an extremely broad range of places and periods where network analysis is underway, from Japan to the US Southwest, and from the Palaeolithic to the Precolumbian. This diversity is potentially extremely fruitful, but there is also the risk that without dialogue these diverse takes on networks in archaeology could lead to a fractured field of study. The explosion of network analysis in the past decade across such diverse fields as sociology, physics, and biology has created a vast array of options, which archaeologists, exposed to different influences, have been picking up on rather haphazardly. Again, this diversity could be beneficial; or it may just create another ironic example of the poor networking among network approaches

(Knox et al. 2006: 114). Hence this volume is an attempt at networking our different network approaches.

One of the features uniting the approaches here is the focus on the regional scale, although the chapter by Mol and Mans shows that networks can be analysed at more intimate scales too. Whatever the scale, we do need to think carefully about how we define the nodes and links in a given network. Should every settlement in a region be considered a 'node'? If so, should we differentiate between different kinds of 'nodes', large and small, or perhaps according to site function? What about the links—how should these be defined? Generally in archaeology very little thought has been given to links: archaeologists will usually satisfy themselves with distribution maps that have lots of nodes marked but no links whatsoever. What do we gain from depicting links, in terms of directionality, frequency, and fidelity, for example? Where does the power of network analysis lie? In the capacity to span and articulate different scales of analysis, from micro to global; in its potential for integrating both people and things; or in its scope for mediating between social and physical space? Or more simply, is it a heuristic for stimulating ideas about links and relations and not just nodes and entities? These are just some basic questions for network thinking that need to be asked across different contexts. What we'll see in this volume are quite different definitions of what constitutes a node and a link—and it is important that we explore these differences. Furthermore, the kinds of analysis performed are not all the same, ranging from centrality measures, to community detection, to characterizing weak/ strong ties.

However, it is too simplistic to argue that network approaches have only been current in archaeology within the past decade. We could trace their use back to David Clarke (1972, 1977) and the New Archaeology, itself influenced by the New Geography (e.g. Haggett and Chorley 1969); and then island biogeography approaches in Oceania (Terrell 1977; Hunt 1988; Terrell 1977). In the intervening years, network applications in archaeology have been few and far between, with the occasional exception, as in work on Cahokia (Peregrine 1991), or Inka roads (Jenkins 2001). What quickly becomes apparent in a brief review is that network analysis never quite gets going, not even in GIS approaches.

### 1.2 NON-NETWORK APPROACHES

It is possible to imagine that for some archaeologists, networks may seem overly structural and rigid, without sufficient possibility for paying attention to agency. With agency high on the agenda in the rise of post-processual approaches in the 1980s and 1990s, this could form some sort of explanation for an aversion to networks. However, many archaeologists during this period were still very much interested in more 'processual' themes, such as interregional interaction (Schortman and Urban 1987). And although Schortman and Urban do use the term 'network' with some frequency, there is no real mechanism of network analysis employed for addressing network properties. The lack of uptake of network analysis is therefore quite difficult to explain, given its considerable advantages over comparable approaches that have dominated this sub-field. Let's take one of these approaches: world-systems theory/analysis. This was attractive to archaeologists because it offered a clear explanatory role for intercultural contact in cultural change, and it embedded the study of trade within the broader phenomenon of 'interaction' (Bauer and Agbe-Davies 2010: 39). There are all kinds of modifications and applications of one kind or another in many different areas and periods (Kardulias and Hall 2008), testament to its broad appeal. However, most applications share one key problem: they are aimed squarely at intersocietal and not intrasocietal dynamics (Stein 2002; Bauer and Agbe-Davies 2010: 40). Even though Stein sees some possibility for articulating it with more post-processual concerns such as agency and ideology, and Kristiansen and Larsson (2005) have sought to create a multi-scale interactionist approach, there is very little scope in fact for bringing a form of analysis so evidently aimed at one scale down to other scales. The name itself gives it away: world-systems.

Another problem of world-systems theory is the core-periphery assumption. Stein (2002) critiques this for having a 'misplaced directionality' (see also Bauer and Agbe-Davies 2010: 40). This is indeed a major problem. But there is a still more serious limiting assumption it shares with many other interactionist approaches: that of the 'zonal' (or 'blob' in Smith's words!) approach to regional space. This implies that influence/resources radiate out from locations uniformly. This is an assumption widely made in archaeology that brings all kinds of corollary problems (Smith 2005; Jennings 2006; Chapter 6 in this volume).

Still, world-systems theory was in many ways an improvement on what had come before, in that it did provide a theoretical framework for understanding the role of intercultural contact in culture change. In contrast, New/processual archaeology had seemed to either (a) focus primarily on local, endogenous processes as the motor for change, in an evolutionary framework, and hence not consider intercultural contact at all (Bauer and Agbe-Davies 2010: 31), or (b) take an overly formalist approach to such contact, underscored by its scientific, quantitative work on sourcing and provenance, as for example in Renfrew's obsidian sourcing work in the Mediterranean (Renfrew 1975; Bauer and Agbe-Davies 2010). Exchange was a key focus in a range of other settings too, such as the US Southwest (Plog 1977), and Mesoamerica (Sidrys 1977), these studies forming part of influential edited volumes on exchange (Sabloff and Lamberg-Karlovsky 1975; Earle and Ericson 1977; Ericson and Earle 1982). While such work made important advances in the archaeological methods for tackling inter-regional exchange and interaction, this impact was perhaps diminished by the distracting debate between formalist and substantivist approaches (Oka and Kusimba 2008). What Renfrew and colleagues were actually doing was identifying some of the actual patterns, and in some cases processes, whereby materials moved between regions. This in some senses continued the fascination in cultural history approaches with intercultural contact, with Childe in particular showing incredible range in identifying cultures all across Europe and the Near East and the apparent 'diffusion' of cultural traits between them. However, the recognition of intercultural contact and influence that formed the basis of much archaeological thinking in the early 20th century was not matched by a firm grasp of the actual processes and motivations involved. Critics found 'diffusion' to lack any explanatory power and hence the emergence of more process-driven approaches, of which Renfrew's work, mentioned above, is a good example.

Yet however far archaeology may have come since the diffusionism of culture history, there remains in many approaches a lingering notion of its 'radial', or 'zonal', approach to regional interaction. We see it still in the coreperiphery assumptions of world-systems theory, as mentioned above. New approaches to inter-regional contact and exchange, such as Oka and Kusimba (2008), or Bauer and Agbe-Davies (2010), recognize some of the existing limitations in exchange/interaction studies, and bring renewed theoretical vigour to the idea of studying exchange. But an accompanying drive for new integrated methodologies eludes them. This may seem curious given the apparent suitability of many techniques in GIS for tackling interactions in space. However, GIS is only as good as the assumptions we generally bring to our archaeological/geographical understanding of space: if we think in terms of points and radial zones, then GIS as a tool will simply reproduce these assumptions, albeit with a sophisticated overlay (see Doel 1999, Batty 2005, on GIS as basically a point-based approach).

### 1.3 NETWORKS NOW

Network approaches can avoid many of these problems. They do not bring necessary directionalities. They do not oblige the drawing of boundaries, zones, or territories based on limited information. They can be relational and/or spatial, so they do not succumb necessarily to the criticism of either spatial or social determinism (note, Smith 2003 on relational and geometric space). And most importantly, they can cross scales. Anything from a household to the state can be thought of in terms of a network (Knappett 2011). We also do not need to reinvent whole new methodologies: GIS, for example, is

perfectly capable of supporting the network approaches that can move us away from territorial assumptions and point-based models towards more relational, multi-scale perspectives.

And what we are seeing now, arguably, is a concerted use of network analysis for some of these very reasons. There are many possibilities for network analysis that have barely been explored in archaeology (Brughmans 2010). Nonetheless, the turn to networks underway is quite a marked development. Why now, and why in this form?

Seeking an answer to these questions reveals an interesting paradox. On the one hand, archaeologists are surely no more immune than any other member of the general population to the wave of publicity surrounding advances in physics and complexity science, driven especially by the breakthrough paper on 'small worlds' by Duncan Watts and Steven Strogatz (Watts and Strogatz 1998), with subsequent popular science treatments (e.g. Watts 2003; Barabási 2002). This is of course caught up in the expansion of the World Wide Web, and the fascination with social networking sites and technologies such as Facebook and Twitter. On the other hand, it is not these kinds of treatments of networks at the hands of physicists that are guiding archaeologists in their actual network research. Some exceptions apart (Bentley and Maschner 2003; Knappett et al. 2008; Evans et al. 2009), most archaeologists, as indeed can be observed in this volume, use the insights of Social Network Analysis (SNA), a field of research in sociology that has been well-established since the 1970s (e.g. Granovetter 1973; White et al. 1976; Freeman 1977; Wasserman and Faust 1994; Carrington et al. 2005). Thus the turn to SNA only in the last five years or so is curious, given that it has been there all along, so to speak. It is possible that the buzz surrounding networks generated by work in physics/ complexity science inspired archaeologists to turn to networks, who may have found the sometimes complex maths beyond their social science training; and then encountering SNA in this process of exploration, they found something more amenable.

We should not be too surprised, though, at the relative lack of awareness of SNA previously in archaeology. Historically, there has been very little overlap between sociology and archaeology; during the great theoretical debates of the 1960s and 1970s, the cross-disciplinary reference points and sources were primarily anthropology and geography (note some use of networks in these disciplines, particularly the New Geography, Haggett and Chorley 1969; and in anthropology, Barnes 1954, 1972; Mitchell 1974, for example).

SNA is also not necessarily an obvious fit for other reasons. First, sociologists analyse networks with links that they can more or less fully reconstruct the friendship ties in a school, or the ties that link business directors to one another via shared positions on directorial boards. Once these ties are documented, the sociologist can proceed to analyse the structures of the networks involved. For the archaeologist, however, these links are generally absent: we have to reconstruct them. This is precisely the point that Søren Sindbæk makes in his chapter—we are engaged not so much in network analysis as network reconstruction, or what he dubs network *synthesis*. Secondly, SNA concerns itself mostly with relational networks, with geography very much a secondary consideration. This again does not sit particularly comfortably with archaeology, as most archaeologists working on networks find it hard to avoid locating their network nodes first and foremost in physical space. Thirdly, as can be seen in the papers in this volume, archaeologists include material culture as a critical component in their networks, often defining links between nodes on the basis of shared material culture attributes or the movement of commodities from one to another.

SNA may have fewer equations than physics, and seem more immediately accessible, but this does not automatically make it the better solution for archaeologists seeking network methods. Indeed, approaches derived from physics/complexity science hold some considerable advantages. First, though they too have been rather 'despatialized', there are approaches now really addressing geographical space with increasing effectiveness (see review in Barthélemy 2011; and note compatibility with GIS). Secondly, they are now getting to grips with time evolution in interesting ways, with dynamics of networks over time a hot topic (e.g. Mucha et al. 2010). Thirdly, they can develop ways to work with embedding material culture links. There is of course a danger of getting carried away with the technical possibilities, and failing to address substantive social questions effectively; after all, physicists are not social scientists. And with some justification some have come under fire from SNA sociologists for not giving due credit to the much longer history of SNA work on networks (e.g. Scott 2011). This does seem to be a real problem of disciplinary boundaries, as Scott points out with research showing the lack of mutual citation (though do note bridge-building efforts in Watts 2004). Certainly SNA has a depth of questions and answers it has accumulated over decades of research that should not be taken lightly; and on the other hand, network science can bring new tools to the table, and inevitably new questions and insights too. Although some serious barriers exist, there are reasons to be positive, and archaeology can, perhaps surprisingly, be a useful bridge between the two.

When all this is said and done, perhaps more important than the source of inspiration is how archaeologists have been putting networks to work. Principally they have been used as an *exploratory* method. This emerges very clearly in the contribution in this volume by John Terrell, who argues that the great advantage of SNA for archaeology is its capacity to provide a set of exploratory techniques for data analysis. This is echoed in the chapter by Leif Isaksen identifying three themes in network analysis in archaeology, all of which have this exploratory character: visualization, metrics, and experimentation. He provides brief case studies from archaeological projects that serve to illustrate

each of these themes. Isaksen suggests, however, that the inspiration for archaeologists has come more from network science than from SNA. Søren Sindbæk in the following chapter also then argues for networks that 'their true importance is as a tool to test and explore properties of complex datasets'. To this he adds that network techniques are also a means of demonstrating patterns and hence providing a level of validation to results obtained by other means. Sindbæk goes on to contrast the process of network exploration in archaeology to that commonly seen in SNA. In explaining his point concerning network analysis versus network synthesis, as mentioned above, he likens the archaeological process to one of working with black boxes—one might know some of the inputs and outputs, but the actual network, or circuitboard so to speak, remains hidden within the 'black box'. So whereas social network analysts know in advance the shape of the network they study, for archaeologists this is the very challenge, to try and discern the shape from material remains of inputs and outputs. In a sense, then, he argues, archaeologists may be better off taking guidance from work in network design optimization, which works with these kinds of 'black-box' problems, rather than SNA. So whether drawing on SNA, network science, or network design optimization, what seems common to all is the desire among archaeologists for techniques that do not need to presuppose too much theoretically, as Terrell argues is the case for Darwinian, phylogenetic approaches. Perhaps it is this search for a bottom-up methodology whereby one can find structure (together with agency—see Scholnick et al., this volume) that is key to explaining its emergence now.

Other key themes that emerge in these and subsequent chapters are time, geography, and material culture. In the chapter on the nature of Classic Maya political authority, by Jonathan Scholnick, Jessica Munson, and Martha Macri, we see the application of techniques of blockmodelling from SNA for community detection. They focus on the ways in which Maya polities position themselves relative to one another, as discerned from statements of political affiliation on stone monuments. They are able to demonstrate the existence of distinct communities or 'blocks' of political affiliation, whereby certain polities associate themselves with one another through various means, sometimes diplomatic, sometimes bellicose. One particularly interesting result is how these groupings do not simply reflect geographical proximity; political links seem to be made, or at least claim to be made, with polities 20 to 70 km away.

In the next chapter by Ray Rivers, Tim Evans, and myself, we use techniques from physics to interrogate some of the principal ideas from SNA used in archaeology; namely, centrality. As we are concerned with networks in physical as well as social space, our treatment of centrality does have a geographical component. We argue that it is important to differentiate between networks that are unweighted and undirected, and those that are weighted and directed. In the former, links of equal strength are either switched on or off, as in

citation networks. This is not the case for most kinds of ancient social networks with which archaeologists are generally concerned: we will tend to see strong links and weak links, and links that are stronger in one direction than the other. So given directionality, it becomes significant how one ranks a site, by inflow or outflow. A 'busy' site, with high inflow or outflow, can be said to have high rank, regardless of its size. When rank and size are combined, one can talk of 'impact'—so a site with a large population and high rank will have high impact. There are all kinds of measures of centrality based on rank and impact—but what we set out to do is find ways of understanding what features might dynamically generate centrality on networks. After discussing some null models—geographical networks, PPA, and simple gravity models, in the sense that all assume undirected links—we turn to models that accommodate gravity while being directed, and which hence can be dynamic. After critiquing the Rihll/Wilson model, based on urban retail models to define the most suitable locations for shopping malls, i.e. those that will best draw in all the 'outflow' of their neighbours, we present as more appropriate the 'ariadne' model, which uses a cost-benefit function to arrive at 'efficient' networks. This is a useful tool allowing us to model how centrality might be emergent in socio-spatial networks.

In the following chapter, Koji Mizoguchi uses SNA, and particularly centrality measures, to compare and contrast two instances of hierarchization in the Japanese Yayoi and Kofun periods, c.600 BC-AD 250 and AD 250-AD 600 respectively. Both scenarios witness the emergence of large regional interaction spheres in which prestige goods circulate, and some sites become central in interaction networks. In the Yayoi period, what the network analysis shows is that the first-tier sites were not necessarily those enjoying the position of highest centrality. In the Kofun period, however, the top sites do reflect network centrality. Mizoguchi suggests that the better fit of the Kofun hierarchy with the topological structure of the network can in part explain its relative stability, in contrast to the preceding Yayoi network, which indeed collapsed. He further argues that the Kofun prestige-goods system was more mature, founded on internal features, whereas the 'primitive' Yayoi system was always vulnerable to external forces; in particular, its reliance on products from the Han empire. So Mizoguchi's treatment is dynamic, linking the temporal stability of social hierarchies over time to their underlying topological structure.

The contribution from Barbara Mills and collaborators also makes use of archaeology's capacity to look at network evolution over the long-term. They take fifty-year snapshots of the US Southwest between 1200 and 1400 AD, drawing on a huge database of over 1600 settlements and *c.*4.4 million ceramic artefacts. They create networks by linking settlement nodes according to shared ceramic artefacts. Two regions are selected as case studies, the San Pedro Valley and the Tonto Basin, and the eigenvector centrality of sites in the two areas is compared. In the San Pedro Valley, first-comer villages maintain

high centrality throughout the 200-year period, while in the Tonto Basin, sites that were central early do not remain so—here centrality did not guarantee persistence. It seems that the dynamics of migration played out differently in the two areas, an elegant example of how SNA can be sensitive to historical circumstance.

The strengths of a diachronic approach are also clear to see in Emma Blake's chapter. She adopts the notion of 'path dependence' to investigate the longterm factors at work in the emergence of distinct ethnic groups in Pre-Roman Italy. Critiquing existing explanations of these regional groupings as simply either primordial or instrumentalist, Blake develops an interactionist model that sees ethnic group formation arising out of social interactions. Furthermore, with incremental investments over time in particular patterns of interaction, it may be that at some juncture it becomes prohibitively costly to change paths, and so the same patterns and structures are maintained—the idea of path dependence. Blake suggests that if this is the case, we should perhaps look back much further in time than has commonly been attempted, and seek the roots of Iron Age ethnic group formation in the Bronze Age. Aspects of Late Bronze Age (LBA) regional interactions can be proposed on the basis of shared consumption of specific imported artefact types, namely Mycenaean pottery, amber beads, and bronzes. Blake argues that already in the LBA there are groups of sites favouring each other in exchanges, and that the network structure seems to presage the position of later Etruscan and Latin groups. In the LBA, then, Blake maintains, 'west central Italy already exhibits the internal divisions that characterize its subsequent history'.

This theme—identifying the emergence of ethnic groupings—is also the subject of the chapter by Anna Collar. Her case study concerns the structure of the Jewish diasporic network and the conditions of its development following the catastrophic events in Judaea in the 2nd century ad. In the epigraphic evidence Collar notes a 'massive increase in explicit statements of Jewish identity from the second century onwards'. She interprets this in terms of changing interpersonal bonds between Jewish communities, with the activation of a strong-tie network spanning long distances. This network was used to transmit the reforms of rabbinic Judaism. Using proximal point analysis, Collar is able to identify aspects of network structure. She uses timeslices—1st–2nd centuries ad, 3rd century, 4th century, and 5th–6th centuries—as a means of approximating the diachronic development of these diasporic networks. What this shows is the increasingly centralized nature of the network over time, heavily directed towards Judaea. The importance of long ties in these networks is an interesting corrective to the 'strength of weak ties' that we often read in the network literature.

In the Roman period studied by Anna Collar, there were very few infrastructural or transport limitations on intense long-distance interaction. But in the material presented by Fiona Coward in her chapter on the Near East, we encounter a very different prehistoric scenario—the transition in the Near East from hunter-gatherer to farming societies, from 21000 to 6000 BCE. Like Collar, Coward uses timeslices to approximate evolution over time and provide some sense of the very long-term dynamics of social networks. Unsurprisingly, with the size of social groups and transport technologies available, here Coward does find that as the geographical span of social networks increases, so those networks become ever more fragmented. This seems to fit with the notion of weak ties as crucial connectors between groups. Yet within more localized regional networks, there is not a tight relationship between geographical and social proximity. An interesting perspective that Coward brings is to treat material culture not simply as a proxy for social interactions, but as an integral part of them, so that the increasingly widespread links between groups are actually facilitated and enabled by material culture (see also Gamble 2007; Knappett 2011). By combining the active role of material culture, a long-term diachronic perspective, and an explicit consideration of the articulation of geographical and social distance, Coward raises many of the main themes with which archaeologists are grappling in their nascent network work.

The approach adopted by Gjesfjeld and Phillips is more sceptical and has connections with that of Sindbæk-that if we are to make headway with archaeological network analysis, we need to confront head-on what Sindbæk calls the 'black-box' problem. That is to say, how do we reconstruct the network 'circuit-board' when we can only view the inputs and outputs? They decide upon an approach that involves establishing a set of generalized models against which one can assess how well a particular dataset fits. They propose three models—local production with limited exchange, local production with reciprocal exchange, and central place production with redistribution exchange each of which comes with certain expectations in terms of their network properties. When they set about testing their own archaeological data, from interaction networks in the Kuril Islands based on ceramic data, they conclude that there is no good match with any one of these models. In their view, this indicates that more work is needed to establish more firmly the links between archaeological data patterns and the likely mechanisms that generated them, as traditional models of exchange are insufficient.

In the penultimate chapter, Angus Mol and Jimmy Mans take a novel approach that works between an ethno-archaeological study of intra-community network dynamics, and an archaeological analysis of inter-community network patterns, both in the indigenous Caribbean. Their argument is that we can misinterpret the inter-site networks if we do not pay sufficient attention to the underlying intra-site dynamics. This is a very useful reminder that, although in this volume we have chosen to focus on regional interaction networks, there are other scales at which social connections need to be explored. Indeed, network approaches do allow for nested, multi-scalar analysis, and this is a feature that does need more investigation of the kind offered here by Mol and Mans.

Finally, in an invited discussion chapter, Sander van der Leeuw considers the themes emerging in the volume and places them within a broader social science context. He identifies the emergence of networks as a key research focus—and the concomitant need for a forward-looking perspective that can capture the very conditions of emergence, rather than an 'ex post' viewpoint that can only see change once it has happened. Indeed the diachronic dynamics of networks are only now receiving the attention in network analysis that they patently demand. And if we can succeed in approximating the temporal development of a network, then we may then begin to see, van der Leeuw argues, how different kinds of networks differentiate themselves over time and gradually become interrelated in complex ways. He makes the important point of the need to acknowledge the multiple forms of networks, using a fundamental distinction between information, energy, and matter. Networks as they become optimal are very often hierarchical, and this is a property that could perhaps be better investigated in archaeological approaches. Although the network has been a useful tool for avoiding the need to assume hierarchy a priori, this does not mean that our networks should be flat when hierarchy is indeed present.

### 1.4 CONCLUSIONS

All the contributions in this volume make explicit use of network models, and the majority from SNA. Many deal with themes that are not a particular strength of SNA, such as dynamic time evolution, geography, and material culture. There are ways of making more use of the powerful techniques of network science, at the risk of moving away from the social questions that ought to be primary; and at the other end of the spectrum, there are those more firmly embedded in the humanities making use of network ideas more figuratively (Malkin 2011). We probably need to work between both ends. I think these chapters are well situated between these different traditions, sometimes positioned antagonistically, and that archaeology can indeed play a bridging role, bringing some of its traditional strengths to bear on network issues: spatiality, temporality, and materiality.

### REFERENCES

Barnes, J. A. 1954. 'Class and committees in a Norwegian island parish', *Human Relations*, 7, 39–58.

——1972. Social Networks. Reading, MA.: Addison-Wesley.

- Barabási, A.-L. 2002. Linked: The New Science of Networks. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing.
- Barthélemy, M. 2011. 'Spatial networks', Physics Reports, 499(1–3), 1–101.
- Bauer, A. A. and Agbe-Davies, A. S. 2010. 'Trade and interaction in archaeology', in A. A. Bauer and Agbe-Davies, A. S. (eds.), Social Archaeologies of Trade and Exchange: Exploring Relationships among People, Places, and Things, Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 29–47.
- Bentley, R. A. and Maschner, H. D. G. (eds.), 2003. Complex Systems and Archaeology: Empirical and Theoretical Applications. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
- Brughmans, T. 2010. 'Connecting the dots: towards archaeological network analysis', Oxford Journal of Archaeology, 29(3), 277–303.
- Carrington, P. J., Scott, J. and Wasserman, S. (eds.), 2005. Models and Methods in Social Network Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Clarke, D. L. 1972. 'Models and paradigms in contemporary archaeology', in D. L. Clarke (ed.), Models in Archaeology, 1–60. London: Methuen.
- —— (ed.), 1977. Spatial Archaeology. London: Academic Press.
- Earle, T. K. and Ericson, J. E. (eds.), 1977. Exchange Systems in Prehistory. New York: Academic Press.
- Ericson, J. E. and Earle T. K. (eds.), 1982. Contexts for Prehistoric Exchange. New York: Academic Press.
- Freeman, L. C. 1977. 'A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness', Sociometry, 40, 35–41.
- Gamble, C. 2007. Origins and Revolutions: Human Identity in Earliest Prehistory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Granovetter, M. S. 1973. 'The strength of weak ties', American Journal of Sociology, 78 (6), 1360–80.
- Haggett, P. and Chorley, R. J. 1969. Network Analysis in Geography. London: Edward Arnold.
- Hunt, T. L. 1988. 'Graph theoretic network models for Lapita exchange: a trial application', in P. V. Kirch and T. L. Hunt (eds.), Archaeology of the Lapita Cultural Complex: A Critical Review. Burke Museum Research Report, No. 5. Seattle: Burke Museum, 135–55.
- Jenkins, D., 2001. 'A network analysis of Inka roads, administrative centers, and storage facilities', Ethnohistory, 48(4), 655–87.
- Jennings, J. 2006. 'Core, peripheries, and regional realities in Middle Horizon Peru', Journal of Anthropological Archaeology, 25(3), 346–70.
- Kardulias, P. N. and Hall, T. D. 2008. 'Archaeology and world systems analysis', World Archaeology, 40(4), 572–83.
- Knappett, C. 2011. An Archaeology of Interaction: Network Perspectives on Material Culture and Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Knox, H., Savage, M. and Harvey, P. 2006. 'Social networks and the study of relations: networks as method, metaphor and form', Economy and Society, 35(1), 113–40.
- Kristiansen, K. and Larsson, T. B. 2005. The Rise of Bronze Age Society: Travels, Transmissions and Transformations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Malkin, I. 2011. A Small Greek World: Networks in the Ancient Mediterranean. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

- Mitchell, J. C. 1974. 'Social networks', Annual Review of Anthropology, 3, 279–99.
- Mucha, P. J., Richardson, T., Macon, K., Porter, M. A. and Onnela, J. P., 2010. 'Community structure in time-dependent, multiscale, and multiplex networks', Science 328, 876–8.
- Oka, R. and Kusimba, C. M. 2008. 'The archaeology of trading systems, part 1: towards a new trade synthesis', Journal of Archaeological Research, 16, 339–95.
- Peregrine, P. 1991. 'A graph-theoretic approach to the evolution of Cahokia', American Antiquity, 56(1), 66–75.
- Plog, F. 1977. 'Modeling economic exchange', in T. Earle and J. Ericson (eds.), Exchange Systems in Prehistory, 127–40. New York: Academic Press.
- Renfrew, C. 1975. 'Trade as action at a distance: questions of interaction and communication', in J. A. Sabloff and C. C. Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds.), Ancient Civilization and Trade, 3–59. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Sabloff, J. A. and Lamberg-Karlovsky, C. C. (eds.), 1975. Ancient Civilization and Trade. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
- Schortman, E. M. and Urban, P. A. 1987. 'Modeling interregional interaction in prehistory', Advances in Archaeological Method and Theory, 11, 37–95.
- Scott, J. 2011. 'Social network analysis: developments, advances, and prospects', Socnet, 1, 21–6.
- Sidrys, R. 1977. 'Mass-distance measures for the Maya obsidian trade', in T. Earle and J. Ericson (eds.), Exchange Systems in Prehistory, 91–107. New York: Academic Press.
- Smith, A. T. 2003. The Political Landscape: Constellations of Authority in Early Complex Polities. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Smith, M. L. 2005. 'Networks, territories, and the cartography of ancient states', Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 95(4), 832–49.
- Stein, G. 2002. 'From passive periphery to active agents: emerging perspectives in the archaeology of interregional interaction', American Anthropologist, 104(3), 903–16.
- Terrell, J. 1977. Human Biogeography in the Solomon Islands. Chicago: Field Museum of Natural History.
- Wasserman, S., and Faust, K. 1994. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- Watts, D. J. 2003. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. London: William Heinemann.
- Watts, D. J. 2004. 'The "new" science of networks', Annual Review of Sociology, 30, 243–70.
- Watts, D. J. and Strogatz, S. H. 1998. 'Collective dynamics of 'small-world' networks', Nature, 393, 440–2.
- White, H. C., Boorman, S. A. and Breiger, R. L. 1976. 'Social structure from multiple networks. I. Blockmodels of roles and positions', American Journal of Sociology, 81(4): 730–80.